Yes, his method of making decisions was
remarkable. And Howard and I always marveled at
how good he was. But once he did that, once he made
the decision, he didn't interfere with anything
and really needed Howard Vestal. But this took a
while.
They had to get complete confidence in anybody
before they did this, and so I didn't realize this
at the time, but they had gotten to know me pretty
well before they said, go ahead and build anything
you want. Of course, it had to go to them for basic
approval, but I would dare say, unlike most
universities, Haskell, that When I renovated
Sabeza, that was, when I say I did, when we did, $5
million worth back at a time when money's worth
many times what it is today. I don't believe Mr.
Cherry or Howard Vestal ever took a close look at
the plan. They just signed them off, which I
appreciate. And were you given adequate?
opportunity to participate in the planning for
the new commons? Yes, oh yes. It's always
difficult planning facilities, you know that,
because you've been there. But you see what
happens is a lot of times your engineering type
personnel become so involved they have a tendency
to overlook the operator. That's what happened to
us. That's one of the things that happened to us
when the Memorial Student Center, as it exists
today, and the Tower Dining Facility, as it
exists. Those decisions as to how they were placed
in the building were not made by operators. That
includes Howard and Mr. Cherry. They were made by
people above that who, in the case of the Tower, saw
some facilities in Dallas and said, why can't we
have one like this? And it was, of course, there.
They had a lot of money. They sold alcoholic
beverages. And people were prosperous by
comparison. And then Memorial Student Center is
so difficult in its operation. It's a very, very
difficult thing to make it break even
financially. Let's take that point. If we were to
separate each of the food service operations on
campus and look at it with a microscope, which one
financially is the most profitable and which is
the least? Well, when I left, always Beza had been
most profitable. And the least would be big cash
facilities like Memorial Student Center food
services. And then up at the top of the tower would
even be... Oh, that was, yes, that was a loser.
That's what I would assume. Interesting story
about that. When it was being built, Howard Vestal
and I were put on the committee as ad hoc members.
Dr. Holland of the engineers was head of the
committee, and he said, well, how are we going to
plan this thing? How are we going to operate? There
was supposed to be a faculty club at that time. So I
said, well, I think you should go out and look to
find something that's successful and see what
they're doing. So he and his team went out and spent
considerable time, went to many places in the
United States, came back, and I said, what did you
find? He said, well, we didn't find anything. in
making profits at one place in North Carolina, but
he said it was off campus. So they decided they
didn't want it. So Howard had told me I would not
bother with it. I got it. And so we were unhappy with
the placement. In the middle, it's so difficult.
If it's to one side, you could have a group big
enough to be possible. So Howard said, well, he'd
at least try to help out. So he went over and tried to
get a change made to have a garbage chute and
couldn't even get that. So that's the way it
happened to be mine for quite a while. And of course
now, it's being well run, I believe, and it may be
making a good profit. I hope it is. But people had
money to spend now. There was very little money and
many restrictions during that time. As you
recall, departments couldn't spend any money as a
group for, at one period of time, as I remember, for
food items. In those almost 20 years that you
served... Well, 22. 22. Oh yeah, that's right. I
was reversing two numbers.
Did the reporting location for you, did it change?
Well, yes. After Howard retired, I reported to
Eddie Joe Davis, who was a great guy, a wonderful
fellow. Then when he moved out, Chuck Hargill took
over his job. And then when he moved, Don Powell
took over his job. And it was during his tenure that
I retired. Now, with the president's, the
different presidents, how did their style of
management differ regarding food service? Well,
I suppose there really wasn't a great deal of
difference, except a lot of them didn't have any
direct interest in it, because it wasn't
exceptional for President Rudder to drop by. Or to
bump into him and he'd say, come over and sit down
and let's talk or have a sandwich or something. Or
to call me on the phone. And the same way with Mr.
Cherry. He might walk in the door. He often did. I'd
look up and he'd be standing in the door. And I'd
say, well, Mike, can I do anything for you? He'd all
know. I'd just stop by and see how everything's
going. But that ended pretty well with Cherry and
the runners. departure
and of course how then finally those one of the
things that i i never did enjoy was that it got so
busy the vice presidents didn't have time to visit
with you now uh did the other people that reported
to vestal and cherry and their successors did you
all have weekly meetings in Well, the element in
Howard Vestal's position, not in mine. Oh, okay.
They had at one time, I think, and discontinued
that. And Howard had a meeting when needed. He did
not have it each week. The only reason I had it is
because of their affairs we had to serve. And it cut
down on a lot of problems. Do you remember any
important decisions relating to food service
that went all the way up to the president to get
decided? Yes or no?
No, I can't. No, I can't. And you're also then
inferring that you can't remember when the
president vetoed positively or negatively, some
recommendation that had come up. No. In fact, I
don't think they ever did a veto or anything. Okay.
Are there any... Well, as you look back, what were
we doing right in those days in your area? Well, we
had some good people. And we were
treated everybody the same, even though it wasn't
very good. And we had some good facilities, good
reputation. And everybody tried hard to do the
right thing. We had a very dedicated group of
people all over the campus that just wouldn't stop
for anything to get their job done. Loyalty was
absolutely beyond comprehension compared to
most places, I think. And in that sense, it was a
good place to be. And what created that loyalty?
Well, of course, loyalty was more common than it is
now. But I think, for the most part, everybody
thought the people above them were fair-minded
people. Nobody was making much money. And they
knew they weren't going to get much when they came
into work. So that wasn't a big hang-up. So a lot of
them really appreciated the fact they had a job.
Because they had come in when jobs were very
difficult to find. And if they left, there's ten
people in line for the job. Who were your key
subordinates? Well, I had Henry Wellens, a
retired Army sergeant, and Harold Therrell, who
was a retired Army sergeant,
and Mr. Ingram, who was a retired Navy petty
officer, I believe. And then later on, we began to
have a few more people. I got some very capable
people, like Clinton Burkhart, a man from up in the
east, Mr. Bierman, Dick Kutches over from the
Kutcher Club, who was ingenious in serving. He
always said he could touch a plate and make it look
better. And then we got some good bakery personnel
in from Notre Dame, hired their head baker. And we
began to get some good people. We got a little
relief on salaries. Howard Vestal tried, but the
biggest relief we ever got was through Eddie Joe
Davis. He really went to bat for some salaries for
our people. We weren't competitive
with the commercial world was the problem. We were
competitive if you talk about other
universities, but that wasn't our competition.
But we couldn't put on the type of show For public
relations, we needed to by paying policy wages. In
other words, why would they come? And we had some
outstanding people. R.V. Ray was one. You may
remember him. You may know him. He's an
outstanding person. One of the top people
anywhere, I think. Now, these food service
employees normally worked only a 40-hour week?
No, our managers never worked just a 40-hour week.
No, but I'm talking about the regular workers.
Regular workers, yes. They started on an
eight-hour shift. They worked a 40-hour week. But
now they, quite often, they had to work on
weekends. Yes. What days did they get off? Well, it
was just, you scheduled them. It took, each
manager had to have his schedule and work this out.
So we had so many capable people this day, pair and
serve. And he did that on a continuous basis. Of
course, we used a lot of students in this
operation, too. When we can get them, that's tough
at times. Let's see. I see in my notes, give me some
examples of some good Aggie bulls, some student
tricks, some goof-offs in the food service
facilities. Well, I'm sure they're more than I
know about. Randy O'Davis always laughs about the
fact that we used to have a sign up somewhere that
said, eat on your tray, meant to eat in front of you.
He said, it's cartoon and a student sitting on his
tray having a meal. We had one joke going, I think,
where I put up a sign that said, take one napkin,
save a tree. And somebody said that another one
said, well, take one serving, save your life. One
of the things we did that I must tell you about, we
didn't know we were setting a pace with the whole
United States at the time. In 1965, we started a
menu board wherein we had students come in, and it
took a long time to develop, actually three or four
years to its fullest extent, but ask them what they
wanted on the menu. Well, we just didn't think we
could do it for a while, but we kept inviting them in
and kept working on this, and we would show them the
menu. We had a five-week cycle. And they would go
down the list and tell us what they thought they
didn't like or wanted more or less of, and we'd
inject it in there. And then we started adding to
that all the new items we could get from anywhere.
And there's a lot of them. Every week or two,
there'll be a new item come up somewhere, and
they'd send samples, and we'd cook it and ask them,
do you want it served? And this was one of the finest
things we ever did. But you don't change a menu
quickly. And this took a long time to develop. And
those students become so acquainted with the
operation, they become supporters and people
that try to help out. And so we had some fine results
of that. Eliminated some items that that we
shouldn't have, added a lot. And today, I believe
that's copied in some manner or other in almost
every university and many of the other
institutions in the whole United States. And to
the best of my knowledge and belief, that was the
first one of that exact nature that had ever been
developed. The problem might have been others,
but I could never find any evidence. Do you
remember how they reacted, say, at first to pizza
or Chinese food or anything like that? Were there
any surprise at that point? Difficulties in
there? Not much because they had been subjected to
this commercially.
It was always a surprise, though. Advertising has
so much to do with the students' likes and
dislikes. We couldn't get them to eat hot biscuits
until they started in fast food places. We had
tried to serve them, and they didn't want
biscuits. They wanted toast. And now they hardly
eat toast. And one of the amusing things about this
menu board, and I'd tell them and they'd laugh
about it, you know, we had some, I remember one
company was advertising spaghetti and meatballs
of all things. So they, this was on a popular show of
some kind, so every time we'd meet they'd say, we
want some more spaghetti and meatballs. But one of
the things I learned that I didn't know, and it's
still a surprise today, the same item is not
popular more than about once a week, and some not
even then. Well, we finally got so many spaghetti
and meatballs until they quit eating them. So we
started taking them off. So we went from five in the
cycle back to about one in the cycle again. So from
then on, I'd always say, now, wait a minute. Let's
don't get too much of this stuff. Another funny
thing is they'd say, I don't like spinach. Take it
off. I said, well, I'd normally say, we're going to
do what you want to do. But I said, before you vote,
you ought to know that spinach is pretty
nutritious. good for these different things. And
I said, probably your mother would want you to eat
some spinach. Yeah, that's right. So I said, but
we'll vote on it. And I always vote to leave it on.
Compared to other institutions, were there any
eating favorites here that were different from
other places? Did we eat more or less of something
than nationally was the norm? I don't think so,
except there are certain items when you go into the
north that just didn't operate here. There's
sandwiches and certain items or casserole dishes
they wouldn't eat here. I know I tried to copy one
from Michigan State. That was a beautiful beef
roll, I thought. It was like a cinnamon roll, but it
had beef rolled up in it, and you cooked this and put
it, and you had gravy to go with it. And it was so
popular up there and here they wouldn't eat it at
all. And I had a friend that came down to Sam Houston
from New York and thought he'd inject some
sandwiches and smoothies we now have. They
wouldn't eat them. And he was shocked to pieces.
Somewhere I remember in the 70s a group of student
activists who wanted us to privatize the food
service and called in a local, I mean a a profit
maker, and he started, I remember he said, now you
tell me how many times a week you want this, this,
this. And then he added on, I think it was 7% or 8%.
One of the students said, what's that? And he said,
well, that's the profit. We'll serve you whatever
you want. And the student said, whoa, whoa, whoa,
no, we don't want to do that. Well, that brings up a
funny point. You know, there's so much of the
community and even the faculty here at the time saw
no reason why food service should make profit.
Because it was a service. And I wish it worked that
way, but it doesn't. No, no. They didn't
understand what the... Let's see.
Proud moments. Think back. What are some of the, in
your years of leadership, what are some of the
things that make you the now the most proud to have
served those? Oh, I think that you get an award for
some group of students, like the battalion. They
condemn you one time, but then they award you
another time, you know, for being outstanding. Or
the President's Association of Former Students
does something. I mean, they're the student
council.
A lot of times, when you're being criticized for
something, a lot of students will step up and do
your defense and say, well, I stopped through. And
we've had that happen a lot of times. And that's
always a good feeling to have. And then beyond
that, when you get national awards of different
kinds, we've got several of those. So that always
makes you feel better. feel good, and it's not as
good as having a student compliment, but it's good
for the school. But those little things come
along, and they're mentioned specifically by
groups occasionally that you serve. So they don't
come very often, and that was a difficult period
during the hippie period of the school. And we had
less trouble in many schools, but we had some
problems. Were there ever any demonstrations
that involved food service or in one of the dining
halls? Well, there was one. Well, that was what
President Rutter was doing. It had to do with
everybody had eaten on campus, as I recall, that
was on campus. There wasn't any place else, but he
decided to be mandatory board, I believe, back
then one time. They marched on his house and this,
I'd had nothing to do with this. And then he came
along and to compromise he gave a five-day plan
instead of seven-day plan. We had 21 meals a week,
what we started out with. Now later on, I
recommended we discontinued the compulsion
board because I told Howard Bestville, we don't
really have a compulsion board. I said, any
student can go to the right people in the
university and just get on. I said, it's
harassment to us. Well, maybe I shouldn't have
done that. I don't know whether I had done it, if I
had to do it or not. But at the time, I was
exasperated about it. He said, fine. Hard to sell
the market with anything. But he was very kind
about it when he told you, no, it was not our issue.
He's just the ideal man to work for. He and Mr.
Cherry both, I enjoyed both of them tremendously.
I think one of the, let's see if you agree with me, I
think one of our great blessings during the 60s and
70s is that we had continuity of leadership. Yeah,
oh yes, oh yes. The... It was like handing the baton
to another member of the team. That there was
continuity when Mr. Rutter came ill and then died,
and Williams, and the people reporting to them
continued. Yeah, there was no change down at my
level, for example. It just went right along. How
did the admission of women change food service, if
any? Well, quite a bit, but not immediately,
because we didn't know what it was going to. And
I'll give you a good example of that. When I
renovated Sebiza in 76, we still didn't have many
women. We had some, but desserts were popular. It
seemed everybody was eating two or three. And we
had a large section just for desserts, and many
desserts. And that's over the, it began to drop.
And hardly anyone was eating a salad. We could put
out salads. And maybe there wouldn't be 5% of the
boys eat salads. Now that's totally reversed.
Completely reversed. And of course the girls like
more dainty varieties of things. This is like it is
in the home. But it took us a while to get geared for
that. One reason was they had so few girls, you
couldn't gear to that, because that didn't suit
the boys. But the setup like it is is pretty good,
where you have a good mixture. And I always wanted
to experiment with where I served only women. See,
I never did get to do that.
Let's see. By the power vested in me by asking this
question, let's go back and you could change
anything and redo anything during those 20 years
plus. Is there any change you would make since you
now are blessed with hindsight? Well, I don't
know. It's pretty hard to say because, well, of
course, I'd like to come in with the ability to make
my own decisions, to spend my own money and
salaries to hire. Better salaries, okay. That
would up things a great deal in my opinion. One of
the things I'd have done if I'd had my saying was to
not go to our own people in our facilities
construction for advice and help by going to the
outside, the people I knew because I had to pay an
extra person I thought and I knew enough to work
with those people and some people I'm sure didn't
want to do that but I did and then
I would have built some things a little faster than
we did But beyond that, I had such good support. It
was just amazing. Right now, the complications of
the design and location of the kitchen on the
faculty club. Oh, that was a, that, that, that,
yes, that was, that was one that. Any others? No,
the faculty club and the MSC were the two that was
really a thorn in our side. The others, the others
were, You see, the buildings were there, and we had
to build within what we could, and everybody
wanted to do what was the best. It was a question of
what was the best. That was the tough part. How do
you do this thing with a structure like Sebiza or
Duncan? And that's the reason I really fumbled
with that thing, and I guess that's the word for it,
for 10 years on Sebiza. We've made enough plans to
fill half this room, probably, trying to figure
out what do you do. And of course, they're
renovating again today. It's very, very nice.
Very nice operation, I think. But the times have
changed a little bit. I think they have less volume
there. They can do some things that are
attractive.
Any advice you would give to today's A&M leaders
about food service? Well, to give it good support
would be one thing, and to never get tricked on what
I think is a trick is to go to this commercializing,
which they call privatization, which is nothing
more than commercial profitization. And I
realize there are some places and some times when
if you can't get competent people to help, that
people have to do that, but they do rake off a pretty
good profit, and if you can avoid that, why do it? As
far as you're aware, about what is that profit
margin at other universities that have
privatized? Oh, I think it's only, well, maybe, it
ranges everywhere from two to five percent, but
that's a lot of money. That's a lot of money. Here,
they'd do it for one percent. I believe that in
order for us to commercially outfit to get the
hooks in Texas A&M, they wouldn't hesitate to pay a
million dollars just for the right to have one
contract. Well, and I found being the CEO at two
different campuses, one of the difficulties of
dealing with the commercial firm is that I
couldn't get their attention until it was time to
renew the contract. Well, that's one problem they
have with some of the companies. The companies
vary a good little bit. I have the experience of
working with some of those people after I retired
here. And I helped them in the sense that I would
help them work out some problems, but I got
familiar with their personnel. And they have fine
people. I have no complaint about them. ethics and
morals of their individuals but the company
policy and and necessity to make a good profit is
there and if you have to cut corners to make that
profit then most of them will cut those corners
very few would sacrifice the company in order to
save a and m food circuits let's see a while ago you
mentioning cervix to the board recall if you can
were there any special uh favorite foods of uh
regents that uh y'all would uh need to keep in mind
when there was a board meeting no not really that
was a strange thing i had heard of some prior to my
time but we never had a problem as a matter of fact
they were an easy group to get along with and an easy
group to please One funny incident I had with Mr.
Weisenbacher, who was very opinionated, of
course. He used to go out and jog or walk, and he'd
come in early, and he'd go back in the kitchen and
talk to these people. And I told somebody I wasn't
afraid of Mr. Weisenbacher talking. I was afraid
of my people answering.
But as a result of that, he just became a closer
friend of the whole operation, including the
individual thing. So we enjoyed it. All right, so
you don't remember any special desserts that
needed to be made because certain regions liked
this or that specialty? I don't believe there was a
single one. They seemed to like most of them. We'd
normally have a pretty good variety, and
sometimes one might ask if we had some.